Topic Modeling Hybridization

— A note on Margento ’s computational translation 
of Steve Rushton’s Thanks (to Ovid); with a note on form —





This contribution to the project is informed by a fluent and at times fluid poetics that centers around fluctuation, contamination, and process. 
I arrived at topic modeling as a best computational method for pinning down the various undercurrents in the poem’s development and for ‘translating’ it into both English and Romanian. 
Each topic provides a rich pool of words alongside the probability of their occurrence in certain contexts, / while the flux of the poem makes the words within the same topic gravitate towards, and contaminate, each other. 
	
	A poem of exile and dislocation on so many levels needs a dislocation of its own in translation, 
	and therefore — for the rendition of the first two sections of Thanks (to Ovid) — I doubled the amount / of text with an excerpt of the same number of words (roughly 7,000) from a forthcoming revised and enlarged edition of Athanor and Other Pohems 
	by Gellu Naum (trans. Margento and Martin Woodside, Calypso-Editions, 2013). The resulting topic modeling lists thus displayed are a hybridized version of sections I and II of Rushton’s poem / and offer the opportunity to let his diction flow into, and be contaminated by, that of Naum ’s (in English translation). 
	
	As the poem advances, the potential replacements of, or alternative routes to, the poet’s words / printed as italicized satellites revolving around those particular words / are higher in probability and closer to the latter in the topic modeling output. 
	
	For medium-related reasons, I was able to do that for no more than three words per stanza, but am making the code available on GitHub (https://github.com/Margento/PoeTopMode) 
	for anybody who’d like to do it further and/or apply it to other textual files/corpora as well. 
	
	For the third section of the poem — “III. First Discussion” ‘translated’ as “III. Sound Disruption” — 
	I chose to hybridize the ‘original’ by tossing in Christopher Funkhouser’s contribution to the Interférences litteraires / literaire interferenties (http://interferences litteraires.be) / forthcoming special issue on “literature and/as (the) digital” / alongside Funkhouser’s poems featured in the anthology “US” Poets Foreign Poets (ed. Margento, Fractalia, 2018), for at least a couple of reasons. 
	One, both authors are poets with a strong interest in, and work on, sound in cross-artform and intermedial contexts, 
	as evident in the pieces fed to our algorithms in this section of the ‘translation.’ 
	Two, both “III. First Discussion” and “Applying Poetic Media in the Digital Humanities” have a confessional / — at times even autobiographical — tone while / speaking of the above-mentioned interests and the authors’ diverse capacities (or even identities). 
	And three, Funkhouser’s essay and poems combined mirrored in certain ways the dualism / (played as schizo, or rather quadro… ph®enia quadrophrenia) in the ‘original’ / involving, on the one hand, the critical - historical (and translational) side of things, and, / on the other, poetic and artistic creativity.

	The fourth section, “IV. Second Discussion,” now that I realized there were hardly any women poets, writers, or artists involved so far in this project, 
	was rendered as “IV. Festive Feminization.” The hybridization of the ‘original’ involved quite a number of texts / (poems, essays, academic articles, lyrics) (co)authored, translated, initiated / (as in, inspiring writing-throughs or fed to automatic text processors), posted in social media, and/or performed by women authors/artists. 
	The pieces range here from Johanna Drucker’s essay “Writing like a Machine or Becoming an Algorithmic Subject” / and her poem “EcoLaLia: UnNatural Selection: Procedurally Driven” to poems contributed by 
	Lyn Hejinian, Alice Notley, Harryette Mullen, Rita Dove, Maria Mencia, Jennifer Scappettone, Page Hill Starzinger, and Rachel Galvin to “US” Poets Foreign Poets / to a peer-reviewed journal article on rock lyrics translation by Raluca Tanasescu 
	to lyrics by Joni Mitchell to one of guitarist Gretchen Menn’s viral Facebook posts to more poems by Sharon Olds and Joanne Dominique Dwyer… 
	(see a full list of authors and titles in the “Contributors’ Notes” section; the files and/or links have also been made available on the project’s GitHub page). 
	
	As a result, the ‘original’ is gradually mixed with (or rather inundated by), then erased by, and finally visually buried in, samples / from all those authors selected from the topic modeling code’s output.
The title of my English translation was obtained by locating the phrase “Thanks to Ovid” / in the topic modeling statistical hierarchies  and picking the closest two words to it (in the the two topics of our model). 
These turned out to be “various” and “wanted” 
and then I also included the two least probable words in the two topics (on the 11036th position), /  “sequencing” in the first topic, and, from the second, actually not the last, “gentlemanly,” but the penultimate, the Romanian “nu-s.” 
Therefore, Various Wanted — [N]US Sequencing, and, in Romanian, Se caută diversuri — [NO]i secvențieri.
(of a file consolidating all input texts throughout the project, the ‘original,’ Naum, Funkhouser, Drucker, and all the other “festive feminization” authors and artists)